so hello and welcome to the third uh tom
rocks
maths live stream which i've been doing
as part of the tom rock's maths appeal
videos which we've been releasing over
the last few weeks so like before
i'm going to start off by talking about
some of the questions to do with volume
that uh have been sent in
by uh the viewers so by you guys so
thank you again as always
for sending in your questions and for um
sort of taking part in these live
streams
so i'll kick off with a few questions i
think i've got uh three questions
um that i want to talk through that have
already been sent in
uh then i'm going to talk about uh a
slightly more advanced
uh definition of volume beyond just
looking at regular shapes which
hopefully you'll all enjoy
and then we'll open up the live chat uh
like usual for the last 20 minutes or
half an hour and then i'll answer
whatever questions
uh people throw in to the chat box
so to kick us off we had a great
question from james which i think is a
really nice reminder
of everything we've been talking about
um to do with volume video which came
out on monday
so james asked um how could we calculate
the volume of a flight of stairs uh so
this is the question
and this is open to a lot of
interpretation about first of all what
does james mean
by a flight of stairs so james if you're
watching please tell me more about this
flight of stairs
otherwise i've made an assumption and
we're going to work out the volume
of a flight of upstairs as i have uh
interpreted your question so the idea is
as follows we have
um what am i going to do here so i'm
going to try and draw a picture so bear
with me on the artist
on the uh my let's say uh
not great arctic uh talent so
we need a set of stairs what's that
gonna look like um
so i'm gonna start off by drawing two
stairs and then we're gonna build up to
a full set
so if i've got a set of stairs i reckon
side on
if you've got two steps it looks like
that
and then if i attempt to kind of draw
something in 3d
this is where my artistic talent is
really tested
and go across and then like that and
we're going to come down right i think
that's a pretty good
attempt at sort of two steps
and so obviously again james didn't give
any measurements so i'm going to put
down what i think are some
reasonable measurements shall we say so
i'm going to call this thing
uh well i say reasonable these are kind
of just made up numbers but i'm going to
say that they're 10 centimeters across
this edge
so that's going to mean that each step
we're assuming the steps are regular so
it's the same step throughout
it's gonna be five this is going to be
five this is going to be 15
um and the height of the step as well is
also going to be five
right so this as i said is gonna be my
starting point for james's problem about
the volume of a flight of stairs so
if we start off uh by thinking about uh
the shape that we have at the moment
it's it's not a regular um well it is in
fact
i say that i say it's not a regular
prism you could actually interpret this
as a prism it's not a regular prism but
it's still a prism
because we we mentioned in the video
talking about volume
we've got a cross section here the front
face
which is the same as you slice through
the rest of your shape
so it is indeed going to be a prism but
the way i thought about it was slightly
different
than the prism method of calculating
volumes um so
bobby in his lesson with us on monday
explain that normally you would
calculate the area of your face
your consistent cross section and then
you just multiply by
the depth or the height as you go
backwards into your third dimension
but what i'm actually going to do here
is
divide it up with this dotted line so
that now
i've got a cuboid and another cuboid
because again bobby taught us all how to
work out the area of a cuboid it's just
width times
depth times height so what we've got
then is the smaller one which is 15
times 5
times 5 so 15 times 5
is 75 times 5 again
is going to give us 75 to 575
uh centimeters cubed for this
front cuboid and then the back one
um so this will have a height of 10
because we're saying the steps are
regular so five and then five so this
height
would be ten so
i've just realized that this is not
exactly to scale with
this has been said to be just these are
like baby steps but it's still it's
still right the right shape so now this
one's got 10
5 uh and then going across we've got 15
so this one is now
10 times 5 times 15.
so that's going to give me 750
centimeters cubed so we add these two
together
and then we've got the volume of this
set of two stairs
now the question from james asked about
a full flight upstairs
so i don't know exactly how many steps
you would expect in a standard flight
upstairs
but if we were to continue this
the way i've interpreted the question
again is to just say well
based on how i've done two steps here
so i said this total thing was 10.
so based on how i've done two the next
step
is kind of going to have to come in like
this
so it can't just be from the top of this
one and up you need some overhang
to sort of bolt on the stairs right
because there's got to be something to
attach it
so i've decided to do it like so
uh and then we're going to have that one
going up and off the top so to add in a
third step
what we're going to be doing is adding
in
another cuboid here so this is our third
cuboid
but it's exactly the same as cuboid two
so for every new set of steps that we
continue to add in
going up like so right and then you're
gonna
get another one for each one you add so
the fourth one
the fifth one and we can continue each
time we're just adding on the same
volume
as cuboid 2. so the first one is the
small one
is 375 and then for every new step we're
adding on the same size cuboid and that
would make 750
for each new step so then if we added on
like say 10 other steps we'd just do
these two plus 10 lots of 750 and that
would give us the volume
of a set of stairs that looked like
uh or it would kind of go up
right so that would be sort of the kind
of set of stairs that i've worked out
here
now there's another interpretation of a
set of stairs which is instead of
sort of having it go off the ground you
could have like an old-fashioned set
where you want this to go all the way
down to the ground like so
and if we were doing this then i would
just divide this up
into several cuboids like so
so this is one which we've already done
then we did two so one was this one
and this was two and then if you're
adding in these extra
ones and we want to go all the way down
to the ground then what we're doing each
time is just adding on five centimeters
extra piece from the from the one before
so we started with
15 times five times five then we went to
ten
times five times fifteen so what we're
going to have this time is still 5 and
15 but now another 15.
so if i were to rewrite this a little
bit clearer
put the numbers in the right places we
always had a 15
we always had a 5 but then we got a 10
for our height for step 2 whereas the
height
so this is the height column
here so we have 5 for step 1 and we went
10 for step 2
then it's going to go to times 15
for step 3 because we made it 5
centimeters taller
4 is going to be 20 whoops that should
be up there 5
is going to be 25 and so we can just
then
get to be 15 times 5 times 15
15 times 5 times 20
15 times 5 times 25
and we can just continue in this way
depending on how many steps
we want to add into our system so we've
got two types we've got the
the ones that are off the floor kind of
the fancy uh
designer stairs shall we call them in
like a fancy open plan building
and then we've got the old school uh
sort of properly going all the way down
to the ground with a firm basis
kind of set of stairs uh but to
calculate the volume like i said
you could either work out the area of
your
um cross section and then just multiply
by the depth
but i think for this instance it's a bit
easier to just divide it up into several
cuboids
and then just add up the volume of all
those cuboids
so thank you james for the question that
hopefully has answered how to calculate
the volume
of a set of stairs great little like fun
i guess sort of throwaway question but
reasonably interestingly
um so the next question i wanted to go
on to
um so this one came in from
uh chen ying so thank you chen ying for
your question
um this one is like a puzzle
and i'm a big fan of puzzles as all
mathematicians are we love solving
puzzles
um so this puzzle asks us
about doubling the volume of a cube
so we're going to start with a cube
and then the question is how
do we modify the cube so that we get
double the volume
so imagine we were trying to build a new
cube getting tangled in my wire
build a new cube that was twice the
volume of our original cube
so first of all we'll start with a cube
so again artistic talent
or lack of oh that's not too bad right
so we've got a cube
i'm gonna assume this has side length
one everywhere
because then it makes it easy to know
the volume so the volume of our cube
is just going to be uh equal to one
isn't it
volume because
again um from bobby's lesson in the
video from monday
it's just length times depth times
height
so uh for a cube they're all the same so
this is just one cubed
which is one now if we double the volume
of this cube then the new volume
the new volume has to be two
and the question is what is going to be
the side length
of our new cube so that we get a volume
of two
so there are a few ways of of thinking
about this i
by making this side length one i think
i've made the problem easier
than it could perhaps otherwise be so
uh i should probably go back and sort of
give you the harder version and then say
that we're going to do this
so if we had this as just some general
length
a then our volume would be a
cubed right
and then we want a new volume which
would be 2a
cubed and this is usually how a problem
like this would be stated
and then as i said you could simplify it
yourselves by making a1
because it doesn't really matter it's
still twice the volume
so the trap to be careful not to fall
into
on questions like this where you're
doubling volumes or areas
is that we're definitely not doubling
the side length
of the cube so that's sort of perhaps
the first thing that might come to mind
i'm trying to double the volume of a
shape
so just make everything twice as big but
of course that's not going to work
for a cube because if we tried that as
an example
draw a new cube where everything was 2a
so 2a 2a and 2a
then our new volume is 2a times 2a times
2a
so then that's uh equal to
2 times 2 times 2
a cubed in other words 8 q a cubed
so doubling the side length of a cube
gives you 8 times the volume
because of this cubed factor so when you
introduce the two you've actually
introduced it
cubed right because it's coming in in
three of our lengths
so what that's going to mean back here
is our new volume
2 a cubed this has to be equal to
the new side length x cubed
no matter what x is we can just say
right this is our new volume in terms of
the old one
but it has to satisfy the volume of a
cube which is just three lots of the
sideline
so um solving we can then just solve
this
equation so doing that and taking the
cube roots of both sides
this is just going to tell you
this is just going to tell us that
taking cube roots we're going to get x
is equal to
a and then in front of that we're going
to have the cube root
of two and that
is going to be the answer that we needed
so this is a lot easier as i said when
you made this one because if you make a
one
this is one this is just two and it's
hopefully
a bit easier to see straight away the
cube root of two is the new length that
you need
and this will work in any dimension so
if you're doubling an area
then you're not multiplying you know
doubling to say doubling a square
you're not creating a new square of side
length two
you're creating a new square of side
length square root of two
and so it's an important uh thing to
remember in all these different
dimensional problems
okay so thank you chen ying for that
question
now the third one
that i uh particularly liked uh was sent
in by two people this one came in from
joe and jamie
i assume this was sort of a joint
question
and they talked about uh something
called the menger sponge
and they wanted to know what the volume
is
for the men's sponge now this is an
awesome question
um you obviously have to know what the
men's sponge is to be able to uh
figure out what's going on in this
question so we're going to have to start
there what is
a men's response so
it's defined as follows
ninja sponge
so before before we get to the so this
is a three-dimensional
shape uh it's in fact a fractal
now some of you may have heard of
fractals some of you may have not
don't worry if you haven't but it is it
is going to be a three-dimensional
fractal
and to think about how to define it um
i think it's best if we start by
uh thinking about the 2d equivalent and
then extending that into three
dimensions
because 2d is a bit more intuitive to
start with easier for me to draw
and then we can think about how it might
work in those three dimensions
so our starting point will be one face
of the cube so the menger sponge kind of
looks like a cube
should have mentioned that so if we're
thinking about the 2d simpler case
we're going to take the square and what
you do
to create your mender sponge or the 2d
version
is you take your square you divide it up
into nine equal
squares like so
i'm actually gonna i'm gonna redraw this
because i'm gonna need a really big
picture
to be able to uh draw this so you can
all see what's happening so let's
do a really big square
as our starting point right so then we
have that goes across there
so the starting point remember was to
divide up our square into nine equal
squares mine may look more like
rectangles but they're meant to be
squares
now the first thing you do is you get
rid
of the middle square so i'm coloring it
in
to show that it's being deleted so we
are now left with
eight squares from our original one
eight ninths of the original area you
could think of it as and that's going to
be
quite a helpful thing for when we're
coming to the volume later
now to generate a fractal one way to
generate a fractal
is to repeat the same procedure over and
over again
on a smaller and smaller scale so it's
called like an iterative procedure
because you are iterating this
several times again and again and again
so what we want to do
is on each of the eight smaller squares
do the exact same process
so we divide up this square into nine
and we delete the middle one we divide
this one up
into nine and delete the middle one
we divide this one up into nine
delete the middle one so i will do it on
all of them just to make it complete
i won't for the next step but for this
one i will
go through the pain of drawing lots of
squares
delete the middle one uh
try it up into nine delete the middle
one
divide up into nine delete the middle
now we have a much more complicated
looking
uh sort of 2d menger sponge and what we
want to do now
is again repeat the same process
so it's an iterative fractal an
iterative procedure so we're going to do
the exact same thing divide up
each of the squares into nine pieces and
delete the middle
each of the squares nine pieces delete
the middle
so i'm just going to draw it in this top
one
definitely not doing it for the others
but you would do this in all
of the squares
right so imagine this top one copied
into all of the other ones
as well and then you're just going to
keep going again so you then take all of
these squares
divide each of them up into 9 and repeat
and the same for every single square
on here so this is like you could think
of it as
one face of our manager sponge
so the men's sponge is the 2d equivalent
of this shape
so um how best to do this so i can stop
i'll draw a small picture and then we'll
come back to this one
so uh if i try to draw
a cube
so we started off with our square
dividing it up into nine equal
squares so we want to do the same with
the cube and you can think of it as i
mentioned as doing this
on each face so if we go over to our
cube let's divide this up
into nine squares on this face
but again we're in 3d so if we're doing
this on all of the faces
um like so again testing out my artistic
you really need to be good at drawing to
be a mathematician i have discovered
this um
so i've divided up my each of my faces
into nine squares
so now i want to know how many cubes
have i divided up my one original cube
into so i'll give you all a few minutes
to think about that
so each face has nine squares and i want
to know how many cubes
i've divided up the original cube into
i'll say hello to everybody who's typing
hello
so if it helps you can imagine trying to
build the sponge yourself or trying to
build this shape yourself
using smaller pieces how many pieces how
many small squares have we used to make
the bigger one
another way to think about it
awesome well done sam thank you so the
answer is 27
as sam has said so the way i like to
think about it is
you've got like three sections you've
got this first slice
then you've got this second slice here
and then the third one at the back and
each of them contain nine so it's like 9
27. so we've got 27 cubes
over here now what we're going to do
next
is the same thing we did for the 2d
square
but we want to do it on our 3d cube
because the major sponge is this on a
cube that's
how you define it so what that's going
to mean is we need to remove
this one so this square has gone
we need to then remove the square over
here
the square on the top and the same
square the middle square
on the other three sides so your cube
has six faces
and you're removing the middle square
think of it or the middle cube from each
of your six faces
but there's also a final one right in
the center
so the very center of the cube is
a another cube that you have to remove
so you're building um it's like
it's a cube at step one you have a cube
but you've like got a hole here
and then it kind of goes back all the
way to the far side
and also goes up and down and out you've
kind of got like a
plus sign shaped hole
in the center of your cube it's a bit
tricky to visualize without having
basically little cubes to build and play
with
i really should get some little toys i
can show this
but you're removing one cube from each
side
in the center and then the very very
central cube
right in the middle of everything so
you're removing a total of
seven cubes
so and that's going to be important so
we've got
um so the question from joe and jamie
was what is the volume
of the manger sponge that was the
question because we're talking about
volumes
uh in this particular topic so
volumes of fractals christ this is a
pretty advanced stuff
so um we started with
27 cubes at step one
and then we reduced this down
to be smaller and smaller and smaller
and we did that by removing seven
from the 27. so you can think of it as
um that's the best way to think of this
of step
zero our volume
um was equal to one
so assuming my original cube had volume
one
then we divided everything up into uh a
third or third a third
everywhere and so
the number first of all in fact the
number of
cubes remaining we then turned it into
27 cubes so we had volume one i probably
should write
uh write a proper table okay so we want
this is going to be the step then we
want to know the number of cubes
and then uh we want to think about what
the volume will be
perhaps yes okay so step zero we had one
cube
and the volume is one step
one we had originally 27 cubes
we've removed seven one from the center
of each side
plus the one right in the middle of
everything
so we removed seven so we're left with
20 cubes
and we can wonder about what the volume
will be
so we had well we know what the volume
will be because we've got 20 cubes left
and each cube is now one-third
on each side because it was dividing up
each length into three
so the volume is a third cubed
so this is now so the third so we got a
third cubed let's just write it over
here
the volume is a third times a third
times a third
which is one over 27
uh but then we've got 20 of them so this
is 20 over 27
right we're going to do the same thing
again for the next step
so like we did with our 2d version we're
going to divide up
each of these into nine smaller cubes
remove the central one and that central
one of the whole cube
so again divide each cube up into 27
smaller ones
and remove seven of those 27.
so what you're going to see is that if
your step
is at step n we have 20 to the
n cubes
and each of those cubes is
1 over 27 to the n
um in volume i think let me double check
that
um yes it will won't it will indeed be 1
over 27 to the power m
so at step n this is 20
over 27 to the power n
so this is your volume at step
n so this works for the first two you
can calculate the next one
and you'll get your final um you know
the right value given what step you're
at
so the volume at step n of the measure
sponge is 20 divided by 27 to the n
so the menger sponge itself
is actually this final cube when you do
this forever
so a fractal will continue forever you
repeat your process
again and again and again gets sort of
you're kind of removing more and more
bits of your cube
um so even though you can think of it
like it still feels like there
should be something there but
our formula for the volume at step n
is 20 over 27 so if we let n
go to infinity what will the volume do
that's what we want to know so we want
to take the limit
as n goes to infinity repeat this again
and again and again
right the way through to create the
whole fractal and we want to know what
that
is going to be equal to and that will be
the final value of the volume
for our menger sponge
exactly sam it's going to go to zero so
the reason it'll go to zero
is you've got here 20 out of 27 this is
a number smaller than one
so anytime you have a number smaller
than one and you multiply it by itself
again and again and again and again it
gets smaller and smaller and smaller
so i often think about say the number of
half a half times a half is one quarter
times a half again is one over eight
then it's one over sixteen
one over thirty two it's getting smaller
and smaller and smaller and going to
zero
so this limit will be uh
well i guess we'll tend to infinity as n
goes to infinity
no no infinity not infinity n's going to
infinity
the volume is going to zero because it's
less than one
getting ahead of myself so the volume
of this menger sponge is zero
which is crazy right this is how
crazy fractals are now
um if you think about the surface area
of the shape
so the surface area of a cube
um surface area of a cube is just going
to be
the area of each face
which is a and a so the area of one face
is a squared
there are six of them so the surface
area
of a cube is six a squared now if you do
this if you work out the surface area
for the menger sponge this fractal
using this process that we've talked
through
your surface area formula i'm not going
to go through this because this is a
lesson on volume and i want to get on to
my other question
but if you calculate the surface area
for your menger sponge
and just sponge
the surface area is equal to
2 times 20 over 9
to the n plus 4
times 8 over 9 to the n
so for this so the volume is going to
zero
over here
volume goes to zero as we create the
full fractal and let n go to infinity
but the surface area is equal to
20 divided by nine so that's bigger than
one
it's bigger than two in fact to the
power n
so as we let n go to infinity
this goes to infinity because it's a
number bigger than one
to a higher and higher power this goes
to infinity
this bit will go to zero but this bit
goes to infinity so the surface area
all together tends to infinity
so this is why the menger sponge is a
fractal because fractals exhibit this
kind of
sort of almost unbelievable behavior
so the menger sponge fractal has zero
volume
but has infinite surface area
so that was an excellent question joe
and jamie thank you for sending that one
in
um right which brings me on to the final
uh
thing i wanted to discuss so this is now
um thank you to everyone for your
questions that were sent in before
i've covered a few of those so now i'm
going to talk to a slightly more
advanced
way of thinking about volume and then
we'll open up the chat
to some questions that i'll try and do
live for you all
so i'll just clean the board
i've got too much chalk just on my
dusters
okay
okay so the um
the final topic or the more advanced
topic i wanted to mention
in this context of volumes um was how to
work out the volume of
a non-regular prism so
so in our lesson uh with the tom rock's
mass appeal series
we talked about um having a regular
cross section
so for example you know you could have a
triangle
and then you extend that into 3d to
create
your triangular prism or you know you
have your circle
you extend into 3d to get your cylinder
but the question is what if this
part of the shape
what if here we allow some kind of
um sort of i guess curve or something
why what if we allow like a non-regular
shape
to happen um within us our sort of prism
or our solid
so the the next i guess um
[Music]
logical step after looking at regular
prisms
would be to look at something that we
call um
volumes of revolution
so this is what we're talking about next
now this is definitely a more advanced
topic
than gcse maths this is something you
will meet at a level maths
and so when you're sort of 17 18 if
you're in a different country that's not
the uk
um so we want to think about volumes of
revolution but i think they're pretty
understandable
if you approach this in the manner i'm
going to demonstrate for you all
um now the idea here is
i'm going to have uh start with a graph
of something so this is my y-axis
and this is my x-axis and then the idea
is i'm going to have
y as some function of x so
let's suppose i just have it doesn't
really well i want something i can draw
let's do something i could draw what if
it looks like that okay
so there is a function
so this is y as a function of x
now a volume of revolution is formed by
taking your curve and rotating it
around an axis so you've got two axes
which we can rotate around
so i could rotate around the y-axis
and create a three-dimensional shape or
i could rotate around the x-axis
and create a different three-dimensional
shape
so i want to concentrate on the x-axis
rotation
for this particular example so i'm going
to take my graph
and i'm going to rotate it around this
axis
so as i do that it creates a sort of
circular shape here and then this
comes in and then you create a circular
shape here
so this would be an example it's kind of
like this one kind of looks like a horn
um like a trumpet horn you would blow
down so you've taken
your graph which was here so this
here is our original like graph
and then we've just rotated around the
x-axis so we've just gone like that
around the x-axis to create this
three-dimensional shape
now what we want to know is how do we
calculate the volume
of this particular shape and i should
stress here this could be any shape so
i've drawn a quite simple
one but you could have any graph here
which so let's suppose it and i said it
looks something like this
and then when you create your
three-dimensional rotation
you just you still get this sort of
weird
um 3d right so it's kind of like a
cylinder but with this big bump in the
middle right so
i don't know what you would call that
shape but you can literally have any
shape graph here
and then you just rotate it around your
axis to create what we call
a volume of revolution so
to work out the volume of a revolution
we have to
go back to something i was talking about
in the second
live stream the one a week ago which was
about thinking about doing
integration and sort of working out
areas
we talked there about working about
areas and here we're going to apply it
to volumes so the first step in thinking
about
what this formula might look like and
where it comes from
is to take a slice through
my curve so we know that we've rotated
around the x-axis and i'm just going to
take imagine just taking two big knives
and just slicing it
at some point so i could slice here i
could slice down here
you know wherever now as i take a slice
the first slice in pink kind of you have
a spin of a slant
and then you have a circle and you have
a circle
and then here you also have a bit of a
slant don't you
right so something like that and then
down here
it's a bit smaller but again you've got
a circle at that end of the circle at
that end
now like i mentioned again last time
when we talked about
integrals the idea was you took
your slices thinner and thinner and
thinner and thinner
so you're doing a limiting process to
make these
really really thin and then add them all
up together
so if we do that here if we take these
as thinner and thinner slices
this shape will look more and more like
a cylinder
okay so at the moment the first big one
has you know there's a bit of a slant
here
so it has it's not quite a cylinder but
if we take thinner and thinner slices
so they're almost like infinitely small
really really small thin slices
they look like incredibly thin cylinders
and that's going to be the key way to
think about how to calculate the volume
so let's just suppose
so it's going to look like this so let's
work on this shape okay so we've got a
really really thin
cylinder now these the uh volume of a
cylinder
so cylinder volume
is equal to um
well hopefully we all remember this from
monday's lesson
um pi times the radius squared
times the height so going down
to our slice down here so we've got pi
definitely now the radius
squared so the radius is the distance
here on our cylinder
so looking at my graph my radius
is the distance from the x-axis which is
in the center of my shape
to the edge of my
graph and again
it'll be here and it'll be up here so
the radius is
changing this is why this is not a
cylinder because my radius changes
as i move along the shape and the same
happens over here the radius is going to
increase
and then decrease but the way we
describe the radius
is actually just the distance from the
x-axis
to the graph but we've said that's y
so at this point this has value y
this has you know the value y where y is
your function of x
so whatever function describes this
graph
the radius is given by y it's the height
at that point
so this in fact is just
y squared now
the final part is to think about the
height
so we've got pi times y
squared so again here this will be y
where y was the distance up here
and then the height is this little bit
here this is our height
so i mentioned that we're going to take
smaller and smaller thinner and thinner
slices
to get a more and more accurate set of
cylinders and then we add them all
together
so each slice of cylinder we take has a
different radius
where the radius is just the value of y
along the graph
so each slice can have a different
radius but
if we say the width of one slice is dx
and then we let dx10 to zero
then this is equal to dx
and then we just need to add all of
these up so the volume
is the sum so we're adding all of them
up of
pi radius squared times the height
where the height is this really small
dx so now just like with our integral
um i'll rub off my fun looking graph
so just like with our integral what we
want to do now is actually do this
limiting process
and let the dx go to zero
so the limit as dx goes to zero
of this sum pi y squared dx
so that actually then just gives you the
integral
of pi y squared with respect to
x where we're integrating from the value
here
a to the value here b
so this is b and this is a
so the volume of a revolution
is equal to whoops come right through
the middle of the integral
won't bother with the box the volume of
a surface
volume of a surface or volume of
revolution
is equal to the integral from a to b
in the x direction so the integral along
our graph
times pi times the radius squared where
the radius is the value y
so that's the actual function of our
graph
and then we have the dx because we're
adding all of these up
over the length of the whole thing so
this is the formula
that you are just taught or you are told
um when you study volumes of revolution
but it actually comes from doing the
geometry and just from working out
and adding up the volume of lots of
little cylinders
where you just make them thinner and
thinner and thinner and then add them
all together taking the limit
to get your integral right and then you
can plug in any function you want for y
as a function of x and that'll work out
the volume for you
okay so i'm going to open it up to uh
questions in the live chat now so i've
answered we started off with some
uh discussions about uh cuboids and i
was looking at the volume of stairs
um then we talked about doubling the
volume of the cube
then we moved on to fractals and looked
at the menger sponge
which had zero volume but infinite
surface area
which still blows my mind and now i've
just sort of
given you a whistle stop tour of how
volumes of revolutions
work
okay so i'm just going to rub the board
while you guys get thinking of some
questions
um
uh
right um so sam has asked me how would i
work out the area of a taurus
um so you can do this uh but it requires
some pretty advanced
uh multi-variable calculus so i'm not
sure i really want to go into
the full three-dimensional integral and
parameterization
of a taurus that would be needed uh to
answer that question
but i will at least draw a taurus and
talk about taurus because taurus is a
cool
um so the taurus is basically a
mathematical name for a donut
so um which i can't draw
so what we've got here uh is i attempt
so this is my sort of attempt at trying
to draw a taurus so it's like your donut
right this is the hole in my donut
trying to make this look a bit 3d
as you look from the side and then this
obviously goes all the way around
so it's very hard to draw a taurus but
it's uh basically just think of it as a
as a donut now rather than as i said
rather than going to the way to
calculate the area or the volume
which requires uh double and triple
integrals
and lots of very complicated
multi-variable calculus
i actually did this question with my
first year
oxford students this week in one of our
tutorials so it's pretty hard stuff
like um so an interesting way
or thing to think about with the taurus
is how you might describe
the shape mathematically um
so the way we do this is if we picture
viewing it from above
to start with so looking down on the
taurus
it looks like um so this is now in the
xy
plane so this is in 3d xyz right z
it's up here uh y is over there and x is
that way
but now if we look down from above it
just looks like
there's a circle in the middle and
there's a circle on the outside
right so looking at a doughnut from
above you've
all probably done this at some point in
your lives this is what it looks like
so the way to describe a taurus then
is to think about um well kind of
how might we describe the taurus with an
equation
so we can think about how to describe
the equation of a circle
so does anyone know the equation in x
and y
that we use to describe a circle so if
you do
pop it in the chat
awesome thank you pascal a square plus y
squared equals the radius
is is radius squared so the equation of
a circle
is x squared plus y squared is the
radius
squared that's how we describe a circle
in the xy plane so when you're doing
your taurus what you've kind of got here
is you've got um one circle
let's say this radius in here is
uh a and then let's say
wait how do we i don't do it like that
do i or do i
uh let me think just trying to make sure
i define this how we normally define
taurus is
so we want that and then we want that
so if i put that one in
okay and then i call right so if i say
this occurs at some distance b
this inner circle which is going to be
halfway between the
the hole and the outside bit then
what we do is we say this distance here
uh or here i guess is b plus a
and then this middle one here is going
to be inner one is b minus a
so the inner circle i guess
so the inner circle is x squared minus y
squared
whoops a squared plus y squared is b
minus a
and the outer circle
is given by x squared plus y squared
equals b plus a
right so that's kind of the the starting
point in the way that we define this
view from above and then when you want
to define this now in three dimensions
um i have to remember how to do this i
think it looks something like
um x is equal to
uh b plus a
b plus a cos theta
b plus a cos theta times
oh i'm going to forget what's y and
what's said um
z has got to be
z has to be what does it have to be so i
need to satisfy
said needs to be um i
think it can't be that um
ah i can't remember it's embarrassing
isn't it i did this earlier in the week
let me find my notes
from my uh my tutorial that i did
fortunately is right in front of me
right here we go i've got it now
i think um yes that's been wrong
i've written the wrong thing that's a
sign
i knew i was doing something wrong so if
you're taurus you say that x is b
plus a sine theta
multiplied by cos phi that's it
then y is b plus a sine theta
multiplied by sine phi
and then your z component is a cos theta
right that's how we do it
okay so this gives you your taurus in
three dimensions
which is um a parameterization and then
you use that
in your integral to work out the area to
answer your question sam
so thinking about what's going on here
because i'm aware i just
pulled this out of thin air and i forgot
the equation anyway
uh because it's fiddly as you can see so
the reason i wanted to think about what
it looks like from above
was to just get you to think about the
fact that you've got this b plus a and b
minus a as these two different radiuses
for your inner circle and your outer
circle and the actual torus itself
is happening between the two
right so it's like the donut shape in 2d
and then our 3d donut over here
so what's going on down here
is we are introducing um two different
angles
which are parameterizing our shape
so the way to think about this
is this central point so this is like
your circle your slice through your
donut
and then this point here is going to be
given
this has radius a right based on our
picture from above
the outer circle has radius a
so this thing here has radius a and to
capture that it's a circle we have this
angle
theta so theta is the rotation around
this circle this like slice through your
doughnut
and then phi the other angle phi
represents this way around
so you can sort of think of it as
you start say here phi tells you how far
around
to go around your doughnut and then
theta tells you
how much to go sort of up or down within
that
sort of tube bit that you're inside
like i said it's pretty it's pretty
advanced and it's pretty difficult to
think about
and does require to calculate the actual
area does require integrating
these functions um over two dimensions
so i'm definitely not gonna do that i'm
gonna leave it there not the best
explanation i've ever given of the
taurus but
hopefully gives you a feel for how we
tried to investigate these i think the
takeaway message would be
this idea of the two angles so you've
got theta here
and phi as the big one phi tells you how
far around your doughnut
and theta is how far up or down
all right any other questions thank you
sam that was a tough one
i mean if nobody else has any other
questions i can always just talk about
another uh
example of a volume of revolution or i
have many other questions that were sent
to me but i think it's always fun
to at least give you the opportunity to
interact live as you guys have tuned in
live
uh rather than late on is there a thing
for
taurus's sections um
i'm not entirely sure what you mean by
that question
um possibly due to my very confusing
explanation of what a taurus is
well in the meantime i will clean the
board
we have got time for about one more
question anybody has anything they want
to know
doesn't have to be related to volume at
this point i think we've talked a lot
about uh different volumes and ways of
thinking about volumes
okay so what we got
the area under y equals e to the x is e
to the x is the volume of its revolution
also e to the x great question sam right
let's do that that could be our final
thing to finish it are you're on form
today sam with these questions
so we mentioned i mentioned earlier the
volume of revolution
so just to remind us the formula was um
we had pi
we had the integral from a to b our two
points
and then we had y squared and then we
had dx
so if we're thinking about e to the x
uh right so e to the x looks like
this uh between naught
and infinity
um okay and then it will decrease over
here right
as well so let me think about where we
want to do our volume
um right so this is y equals e to the
x and this is x so let's just leave it
as a and b for now and then we'll worry
about the limits in a minute
so if we plug in these numbers um we
expect the volume to be
pi a b uh
y squared so that's just e to the 2x
dx now this is not going to just give us
e to the x so it's definitely not quite
um
what you thought earlier sam so whilst
the the area
might or the function itself might
integrate to give you e to the x
when you're doing this volume of
revolution and we take this around here
this around here so again you this is
like again this is like an infinite
an infinitely long horn right where
you're blowing down this end
and the sound sort of coming out down
here so calculating this
you're going to get pi you're going to
do your integration so that's going to
be
um a half e to the 2x
because if i differentiate that the 2
comes down
to cancel the half and gives me e to the
2x between b
and a um and so
that's now going to be pi over 2
times e to the 2b
minus e to the 2 a
right so that's our formula for two
general points a and b
so if we now think about um
so we now think about right so we've got
pi
um y squared dx yup yup yup yup
pi over 2 and so if we now plug in the
values we can think about what a and b
might
be so if a was going all the way
down to minus infinity
then e to the minus infinity would give
us zero
so that term is going to vanish if we
went all the way down to minus infinity
but then if we went all the way up to
positive infinity
this one goes to infinity
so if you are working out the volume of
the whole infinitely long horn shape
going like this you're going to get
infinity
which perhaps isn't a surprise because
it's an infinitely long
shape and it's growing in height as you
go further and further along x
so you would get infinity for the full
shape
so instead of doing that let's say we do
it from minus infinity to zero
so let's look at the volume of this half
just the the negative
x values so if we plug those in then
that's going to tell us now that
a is minus infinity and b is now zero
so then the answer there will be pi over
times e to the zero which is one
times e to the minus infinity
e to the minus infinity um
which is going to give us zero so the
answer
for this part
only for negative x the answer is pi
over two
which is a really nice perhaps
surprising result
we have an infinitely long section
which has here has a radius one
and obviously down at infinity it goes
to zero but
it's infinitely long and yet the volume
of this section
is equal to pi over two so great
question sam
not quite um perhaps the answer that you
uh
had in mind or were looking for but
certainly an interesting thing to think
about so the full graph
would give us infinity but the negative
bit gives us pi over two which is a
really nice result i think
right so that's just gone over an hour
so
uh i'm going to call it a day there
thank you again everyone for joining me
uh thanks for everyone sending in your
questions so we had uh james talked
about the volume of a flight of stairs
great question james we had joe and
jamie
made me talk about fractals and the
volume
of the menger sponge so remember for
those of you just joining we showed that
the volume of the menger sponge which is
a 3d fractal
the volume is zero and the surface area
is infinity which is mind-blowing but we
broke down some formulas and we showed
it was true
um and then we also we also looked at
doubling the volume of a cube
that was our other volume question then
i went on to talk about volumes of
revolution so i derived this formula
um geometrically and sort of thinking
about adding up lots of cylinders
then we've done this example here with
the exponential and i also talked a
little bit
though it was quite muddled but i talked
a little bit about a taurus
and how you think about a donut and
describing that in three-dimensional
space
um so again thank you very much for
joining i'll be back in exactly one week
so 4 p.m uk time next friday
and the theme will be straight line
graphs um so there's a lot of fun we can
have with straight line graphs
and so the next tom rock's maths appeal
video will come out on monday
that will be me bobby and susan
explaining straight line graphs
and then bobby and susan will do their
questions uh on thursday
they record those in a video so if you
have any questions for bobby and susan
send those in by wednesday and then i'll
be back live
four o'clock next friday uk time uh
to answer questions people have sent me
beforehand so again i'll start with
questions have already been sent in and
then i'll open it up
to the live chat so thank you very much
everybody for joining me and i'll see
you soon bye